Acidosis . Symptoms, Diagnosis, Treatment of Acidosis . NY Times Health Information. Health Guide Acidosis. Acidosis is a condition in which there is too much acid in the body fluids. It is the opposite of alkalosis (a condition in which there is too much base in the body fluids). The kidneys and lungs maintain the balance (proper pH level) of chemicals called acids and bases in the body. Acidosis occurs when acid builds up or when bicarbonate (a base) is lost. Acidosis is classified as either respiratory acidosis or metabolic acidosis. Respiratory acidosis develops when there is too much carbon dioxide (an acid) in the body. This type of acidosis is usually caused when the body is unable to remove enough carbon dioxide through breathing. Other names for respiratory acidosis are hypercapnic acidosis and carbon dioxide acidosis. Causes of respiratory acidosis include. Metabolic acidosis develops when too much acid is produced or the kidneys cannot remove enough acid from the body. There are several types of metabolic acidosis. Other causes of metabolic acidosis include. See. An arterial blood gas analysis or serum electrolytes test, such as a basic metabolic panel, will confirm that acidosis is present and indicate whether it is metabolic acidosis or respiratory acidosis. Other tests may be needed to determine the cause of the acidosis. Treatment depends on the cause. Acidosis can be dangerous if untreated. Many cases respond well to treatment. Complications depend on the specific type of acidosis. Although there are several types of acidosis, all will cause symptoms that require treatment by your health care provider. Prevention depends on the cause of the acidosis. Normally, people with healthy kidneys and lungs do not experience significant acidosis. Seifter JL. Acid.base disorders. In. Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, Pa. Saunders Elsevier; 2011.chap 120. October 7, 2017, 6.00 AM October 6, 2017 October 6, 2017 October 6, 2017 October 6, 2017 More Blog Headlines »
